Introduction
============

Antarctica is the southernmost continent in the world and is 16,624 km away from the UK. It’s total area is 14 million km², and the continent is divided into two regions, known as East Antarctica and West Antarctica. East Antarctica is composed of two thirds of the continent’s total area, and ice is (on average) 2.5km thick here. Whereas West Antarctica (also known as Lesser Antarctica) is a series of frozen islands, reaching towards South America’s southern tip. East Antarctica is altogether bigger, has thicker ice, and has older ice than West/Lesser Antarctica.

Surprisingly the continent is classified as a desert. This is due to its severe lack of precipitation, it being the coldest, driest, and windiest continent on Earth, even experiencing less rainfall than the Sahara. Rather than moisture sinking into the ground, (the situation in most deserts), snow simply piles on top of itself in Antarctica.

Antarctica’s climate is the coldest and driest on Earth. On average the temperature is -57°C, however this can fall down to -90°C, the minimum temperature. The maximum temperature is achievable in Summer, being between -2°C and 8°C, although this can be a couple degrees warmer on the coastline.Precipitation in Antarctica is mainly snow. Most of the continent’s precipitation is found on the coastlines, where about 200mm can fall annually. However, in mountainous areas, or on the East Antarctica Plateau, precipitation is less than 50mm in the same period of time. Due to Antarctica being so cold, it receives less precipitation when compared to other desert regions, such as the Sahara. Consequently, snow is able to build up over the years. Antarctic winds are also very strong, reaching 200mph.

Since Antarctica is in the southern hemisphere, it experiences its summers when it is Winter in the UK, and vice versa. In Antarctic summers, there are several months, where the sun doesn’t set over a 24 hour period, leading to 24 hours of daylight. On the contrary, this is the opposite during the winter periods, where Antarctica receives 24 hours of darkness. This is explained by the sun’s low angle in the sky to Antarctica, also explaining why it is extremely cold, the sun’s heat is spread over a larger area.
Over 98% of Antarctica is overlain by ice. The two regions of Antarctica are separated by the Transantarctic Mountains. Moreover at least two active volcanoes can be found in Antarctica. One of which is Mount Erebus at 3,794m, being the tallest. Moreover one feature of the volcano is that it has a permanent molten lava lake. The latter, Deception Island Volcano is located on, as its name indicates, on Deception Island, situated just north of the Antarctic Peninsula. The continent’s average altitude is approximately 2.3km, significantly higher compared to other continents.

Mainly, wildlife on land in Antarctica is solely penguins. However there are birds such as albatrosses, petrels, cormorants, skuas, gulls, terns, prions and other seabirds. Wildlife in antarctic water includes whales, seals, krill and squid. This includes orca, and leopard seals.

